.. SPDX-License-Identifier: GPL-2.0+

Linux* Driver for Intel(R) Ethernet Network Connection
======================================================

Intel Gigabit Linux driver.
Copyright(c) 2008-2018 Intel Corporation.

Contents
========

- Identifying Your Adapter
- Additional Configurations
- Support

Identifying Your Adapter
========================
For information on how to identify your adapter, and for the latest Intel
network drivers, refer to the Intel Support website:
http://www.intel.com/support


Additional Features and Configurations
======================================

Jumbo Frames
------------
Jumbo Frames support is enabled by changing the Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU)
to a value larger than the default value of 1500.

Use the ifconfig command to increase the MTU size. For example, enter the
following where <x> is the interface number::

    ifconfig eth<x> mtu 9000 up

Alternatively, you can use the ip command as follows::

    ip link set mtu 9000 dev eth<x>
    ip link set up dev eth<x>

This setting is not saved across reboots. The setting change can be made
permanent by adding 'MTU=9000' to the file:

- For RHEL: /etc/sysconfig/network-scripts/ifcfg-eth<x>
- For SLES: /etc/sysconfig/network/<config_file>

NOTE: The maximum MTU setting for Jumbo Frames is 8996. This value coincides
with the maximum Jumbo Frames size of 9018 bytes.

NOTE: Using Jumbo frames at 10 or 100 Mbps is not supported and may result in
poor performance or loss of link.

NOTE: The following adapters limit Jumbo Frames sized packets to a maximum of
4088 bytes:
  - Intel(R) 82578DM Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82577LM Gigabit Network Connection

The following adapters do not support Jumbo Frames:
  - Intel(R) PRO/1000 Gigabit Server Adapter
  - Intel(R) PRO/1000 PM Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562G 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562G-2 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562GT 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562GT-2 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562V 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82562V-2 10/100 Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82566DC Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82566DC-2 Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82566DM Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82566MC Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82566MM Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82567V-3 Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82577LC Gigabit Network Connection
  - Intel(R) 82578DC Gigabit Network Connection

NOTE: Jumbo Frames cannot be configured on an 82579-based Network device if
MACSec is enabled on the system.


ethtool
-------
The driver utilizes the ethtool interface for driver configuration and
diagnostics, as well as displaying statistical information. The latest ethtool
version is required for this functionality. Download it at:

https://www.kernel.org/pub/software/network/ethtool/

NOTE: When validating enable/disable tests on some parts (for example, 82578),
it is necessary to add a few seconds between tests when working with ethtool.


Speed and Duplex Configuration
------------------------------
In addressing speed and duplex configuration issues, you need to distinguish
between copper-based adapters and fiber-based adapters.

In the default mode, an Intel(R) Ethernet Network Adapter using copper
connections will attempt to auto-negotiate with its link partner to determine
the best setting. If the adapter cannot establish link with the link partner
using auto-negotiation, you may need to manually configure the adapter and link
partner to identical settings to establish link and pass packets. This should
only be needed when attempting to link with an older switch that does not
support auto-negotiation or one that has been forced to a specific speed or
duplex mode. Your link partner must match the setting you choose. 1 Gbps speeds
and higher cannot be forced. Use the autonegotiation advertising setting to
manually set devices for 1 Gbps and higher.

Speed, duplex, and autonegotiation advertising are configured through the
ethtool* utility.

Caution: Only experienced network administrators should force speed and duplex
or change autonegotiation advertising manually. The settings at the switch must
always match the adapter settings. Adapter performance may suffer or your
adapter may not operate if you configure the adapter differently from your
switch.

An Intel(R) Ethernet Network Adapter using fiber-based connections, however,
will not attempt to auto-negotiate with its link partner since those adapters
operate only in full duplex and only at their native speed.


Enabling Wake on LAN* (WoL)
---------------------------
WoL is configured through the ethtool* utility.

WoL will be enabled on the system during the next shut down or reboot. For
this driver version, in order to enable WoL, the e1000e driver must be loaded
prior to shutting down or suspending the system.

NOTE: Wake on LAN is only supported on port A for the following devices:
- Intel(R) PRO/1000 PT Dual Port Network Connection
- Intel(R) PRO/1000 PT Dual Port Server Connection
- Intel(R) PRO/1000 PT Dual Port Server Adapter
- Intel(R) PRO/1000 PF Dual Port Server Adapter
- Intel(R) PRO/1000 PT Quad Port Server Adapter
- Intel(R) Gigabit PT Quad Port Server ExpressModule


Support
=======
For general information, go to the Intel support website at:

https://www.intel.com/support/

or the Intel Wired Networking project hosted by Sourceforge at:

https://sourceforge.net/projects/e1000

If an issue is identified with the released source code on a supported kernel
with a supported adapter, email the specific information related to the issue
to e1000-devel@lists.sf.net.
