================================
Landlock: userland documentation
================================

Landlock rules
==============

eBPF programs are used to create security rules.  They are contained and can
call only a whitelist of dedicated functions. Moreover, they cannot loop, which
protects from denial of service.  More information on BPF can be found in
*Documentation/networking/filter.txt*.


Writing a rule
--------------

To enforce a security policy, a thread first needs to create a Landlock rule.
The easiest way to write an eBPF program depicting a security rule is to write
it in the C language.  As described in *samples/bpf/README.rst*, LLVM can
compile such programs.  Files *samples/bpf/landlock1_kern.c* and those in
*tools/testing/selftests/landlock/rules/* can be used as examples.  The
following example is a simple rule to forbid file creation, whatever syscall
may be used (e.g. open, mkdir, link...).  The *ctx->arg2* contains the action
type performed on the file (cf. :ref:`fs_actions`).

.. code-block:: c

    static int deny_file_creation(struct landlock_context *ctx)
    {
        if (ctx->arg2 & LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_NEW)
            return 1;
        return 0;
    }

Once the eBPF program is created, the next step is to create the metadata
describing the Landlock rule.  This metadata includes a subtype which contains
the version of Landlock, the event to which the rule is tied, and optional
Landlock rule abilities.

.. code-block:: c

    static union bpf_prog_subtype subtype = {
        .landlock_rule = {
            .version = 1,
            .event = LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_EVENT_FS,
        }
    };

The Landlock version is important to inform the kernel which features or
behavior the rule can handle.  The user-space thread should set the lowest
possible version to be as compatible as possible with older kernels.  For the
list of features provided by version, see :ref:`features`.

A Landlock event describes the kind of kernel object for which a rule will be
triggered to allow or deny an action.  For example, the event
LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_EVENT_FS is triggered every time a landlocked thread performs
an action related to the filesystem (e.g. open, read, write, mount...).

The Landlock rule abilities should only be used if the rule needs a specific
feature such as debugging.  This should be avoided if not strictly necessary.

The next step is to fill a :c:type:`union bpf_attr <bpf_attr>` with
BPF_PROG_TYPE_LANDLOCK, the previously created subtype and other BPF program
metadata.  This bpf_attr must then be passed to the :manpage:`bpf(2)` syscall
alongside the BPF_PROG_LOAD command.  If everything is deemed correct by the
kernel, the thread gets a file descriptor referring to this rule.

In the following code, the *insn* variable is an array of BPF instructions
which can be extracted from an ELF file as is done in bpf_load_file() from
*samples/bpf/bpf_load.c*.

.. code-block:: c

    union bpf_attr attr = {
        .prog_type = BPF_PROG_TYPE_LANDLOCK,
        .insn_cnt = sizeof(insn) / sizeof(struct bpf_insn),
        .insns = (__u64) (unsigned long) insn,
        .license = (__u64) (unsigned long) "GPL",
        .prog_subtype = &subtype,
        .prog_subtype_size = sizeof(subtype),
    };
    int rule = bpf(BPF_PROG_LOAD, &attr, sizeof(attr));
    if (rule == -1)
        exit(1);


Enforcing a rule
----------------

Once the Landlock rule has been created or received (e.g. through a UNIX
socket), the thread willing to sandbox itself (and its future children) needs
to perform two steps to properly enforce a rule.

The thread must first request to never be allowed to get new privileges with a
call to :manpage:`prctl(2)` and the PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS option.  More
information can be found in *Documentation/prctl/no_new_privs.txt*.

.. code-block:: c

    if (prctl(PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS, 1, NULL, 0, 0))
        exit(1);

A thread can apply a rule to itself by using the :manpage:`seccomp(2)` syscall.
The operation is SECCOMP_APPEND_LANDLOCK_RULE, the flags must be empty and the
*args* argument must point to a valid Landlock rule file descriptor.

.. code-block:: c

    if (seccomp(SECCOMP_APPEND_LANDLOCK_RULE, 0, &rule))
        exit(1);

If the syscall succeeds, the rule is now enforced on the calling thread and
will be enforced on all its subsequently created children of the thread as
well.  Once a thread is landlocked, there is no way to remove this security
policy, only stacking more restrictions is allowed.

When a syscall ask for an action on a kernel object, if this action is denied,
then an EPERM errno code is returned through the syscall.


.. _inherited_rules:

Inherited rules
---------------

Every new thread resulting from a :manpage:`clone(2)` inherits Landlock rule
restrictions from its parent.  This is similar to the seccomp inheritance as
described in *Documentation/prctl/seccomp_filter.txt*.


Ptrace restrictions
-------------------

A landlocked process has less privileges than a non-landlocked process and must
then be subject to additional restrictions when manipulating another process.
To be allowed to use :manpage:`ptrace(2)` and related syscalls on a target
process, a landlocked process must have a subset of the target process rules.


.. _features:

Landlock features
=================

In order to support new features over time without changing a rule behavior,
every context field, flag or helpers has a minimal Landlock version in which
they are available.  A thread needs to specify this minimal version number in
the subtype :c:type:`struct landlock_rule <landlock_rule>` defined in
*include/uapi/linux/bpf.h*.


Context
-------

The arch and syscall_nr fields may be useful to tighten an access control, but
care must be taken to avoid pitfalls as explain in
*Documentation/prctl/seccomp_filter.txt*.

.. kernel-doc:: include/uapi/linux/bpf.h
    :functions: landlock_context


Landlock event types
--------------------

.. kernel-doc:: include/uapi/linux/bpf.h
    :functions: landlock_subtype_event

.. flat-table:: Event types availability

    * - flags
      - since

    * - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_EVENT_FS
      - v1


File system access request
--------------------------

Optional arguments from :c:type:`struct landlock_context <landlock_context>`:

* arg1: filesystem handle
* arg2: action type


.. _fs_actions:

File system action types
------------------------

Flags are used to express actions.  This makes it possible to compose actions
and leaves room for future improvements to add more fine-grained action types.

.. kernel-doc:: include/uapi/linux/bpf.h
    :doc: landlock_action_fs

.. flat-table:: FS action types availability

    * - flags
      - since

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_EXEC
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_WRITE
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_READ
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_NEW
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_GET
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_REMOVE
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_IOCTL
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_LOCK
      - v1

    * - LANDLOCK_ACTION_FS_FCNTL
      - v1


Ability types
-------------

The ability of a Landlock rule describes the available features (i.e. context
fields and helpers).  This is useful to abstract user-space privileges for
Landlock rules, which may not need all abilities (e.g. debug).  Only the
minimal set of abilities should be used (e.g. disable debug once in
production).


.. kernel-doc:: include/uapi/linux/bpf.h
    :doc: landlock_subtype_ability

.. flat-table:: Ability types availability

    * - flags
      - since
      - capability

    * - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_WRITE
      - v1
      - CAP_SYS_ADMIN

    * - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_DEBUG
      - v1
      - CAP_SYS_ADMIN


Helper functions
----------------

See *include/uapi/linux/bpf.h* for functions documentation.

.. flat-table:: Generic functions availability

    * - helper
      - since
      - ability

    * - bpf_map_lookup_elem
      - v1
      - (none)

    * - bpf_map_delete_elem
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_WRITE

    * - bpf_map_update_elem
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_WRITE

    * - bpf_get_current_comm
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_DEBUG

    * - bpf_get_current_pid_tgid
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_DEBUG

    * - bpf_get_current_uid_gid
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_DEBUG

    * - bpf_get_trace_printk
      - v1
      - LANDLOCK_SUBTYPE_ABILITY_DEBUG

.. flat-table:: File system functions availability

    * - helper
      - since
      - ability

    * - bpf_handle_fs_get_mode
      - v1
      - (none)

